Let's take a look at a demo of this in action.
We're going to open up the unity editor, open our course sample project.
Same project for for the entire course.
And within it we'll be looking at some of the scenes.
I've got a pure functions area within the lessons.
And we'll see a bit more about dummy sub, fake mock and spy and we'll be able to compare those.
So here we are inside unity.
This is the course sample project used elsewhere in some of the other lessons and videos.
And what I want to show here, just as a brief reintroduction, is that in my layout on the right,
I've got the inspector showing the readme asset inside the project, so you can click that here and
see Readme and it shows up here.
Or you can go to Window Unit Testing and open readme.
The Readme here gives you some high level info about the sample project, and also includes a ever updating
list here of which lessons and which workshops are interesting.
So you may notice from video to video that this looks a little different as the course gets expanded
and there's more content.
What we're going to look at here is the pure functions lesson.
So if I click on that it selects right here where we want to be.
Then I'll open up the pure functions example.
Now, as with the other scenes that we've looked at, there is a production scene that you can run.
That's not the most interesting part, but let's start with that here.
If I just click play.
In the scene here.
It will give us a little bit of console output.
So this is just to reinforce the idea as we're going through this, that there is a scene, there is
production code.
In our case it's doing pretty little stuff.
We're really invited to look at the test runner window above.
The test runner window here allows us to zero in on any one category.
In this case, we're looking at the pure functions.
And then we've got all the pure functions here.
These are all testing and all testing is passing.
So if I select the top node here and click Run All, it will run all those tests.
Now I've included edit mode and play mode tests for every lesson, every scene throughout the course.
And in certain cases, I think it's more relevant for us to look at one or the other.
In this case, the edit mode is really important.
So why is the edit mode important?
Because we're not really using in this specific case any runtime features like Monobehaviour and other
things from the unity library.
So edit mode is relevant there.
And moreover, we're going to be looking at the end substitute library and that we're operates edit
only.
So you can only apply that in these edit mode tests.
So let's expand the test here and see.
We've got a pure test here a non pure test and then a non pure advanced test similar to the theory that
we saw in the slides portion.
We had the original pure example.
Then we thought well let's take a look at a non pure example that is somehow has these indirect inputs
or indirect outputs.
And then the advanced is kind of the evolved solution to the problem.
Now the non pure even after getting massaged here it's not 100% pure.
So it may be helpful for you to look at the pure test to reinforce the theory.
Why is a pure test pure then see the my system number two as a starting point for a non refactored kind
of problematic use case.
And then look at the advanced test here showing the advanced as a kind of evolved solution to it.
And those are all options that you'd have for yourself.
You can create certainly pure systems in your code base.
You can create ones that are non pure and a bit problematic for the testing.
And maybe that's fine in certain situations.
And then if you want to evolve, refactor and improve, making the test more solitary then sociable,
for example, you can look at the advanced as a model there.
So let's go through and look at the source code for each of them.
So let's start here by looking at the test for the pure system.
I'll read it here.
The test we're going to be converting the value.
The result we assume is 20.
We expect that when the input is two and ten.
So here's our arranged inputs.
Here's passing them in.
And here's the value out.
So again as we saw in the theory portion, the reason that this is a pure function is that the result
depends only on the passed in input and nothing else.
And it has no side effects.
So no indirect inputs and no indirect outputs.
So that's pure.
Let's look at the source code for the pure.
And it's quite simple.
I believe it's identical to what we saw in the slides, maybe a little bit of tweaking.
We're passing in the int and the multiplier and we return that.
We don't do any other unrelated dependencies here.
We're not creating any new systems.
We're not addressing any other systems.
We're not setting any other values.
We're just multiplying and returning it.
And again, returning value doesn't count as an indirect output.
That is the direct output.
So this is about as pure as you can get.
It's a very beautiful example and a good starting point.
And when we run that example here.
We see that it works great.
It's green.
Check mark.
Now let's move on to the next one.
So here is a non pure test.
Here we see we're going to convert the value.
We assume the result is 30 when the input passed in is three.
Now we're establishing a value of three and a multiplier of ten.
Those two int values were also used in the previous test.
Slightly different values being used, but the point is similar inputs.
But notice how one input goes in here and one input goes in here.
So this test here is about convert value.
So convert value depends on value of three being passed in.
And unfortunately from a purity standpoint it also depends on the multiplier value which is some shared
state that was passed in up here.
Now you can imagine depending on the production needs you have, you might have this type of situation.
You might have in the constructor setting some state.
And then in a method using part of that state.
As we see here, you might also have seven different methods to a class.
And calling method one and method three are going to be affecting the state.
When we finally call method seven, it depends on did you call three?
Did you call five, did you set some public properties, etcetera?
It's very normal.
In object oriented programming, you would expect different method calls to perhaps leave behind some
shared state.
That is all okay, but we'd consider it to be impure and testing it has some additional thoughts and
implications.
So here again the problematic part is that we have the indirect input.
So let's take a look at the source code here.
Here compared to the pure implementation I added a few things just for the academic process here.
If you kind of problems to be solved.
One is that we're storing a multiplier, and one is that we're storing a last result down here.
We see last result is getting set.
This is an example of indirect output because before we call convert value last result does not have
any value set.
But after calling convert value last result does have a value set.
Perhaps changing from what it was previously, depending exactly on what the value and multiplier are.
So this non pure example shows both indirect input and indirect output.
Indirect input.
Because part of the input comes here and gets used here.
So from the convert values standpoint, just the highlighted code here.
Some of what's going to affect the input is not highlighted blue here.
It actually was set earlier.
You could you could call that problematic from a purity standpoint.
And then also we have indirect output.
Not only are we returning a value which is perfect and pure, we are also setting last result.
Again this is an indirect output and would be considered undesirable from a purity standpoint.
Doesn't indicate that this is a problematic piece of source code that would not help our production
needs.
Certainly, you're going to have some situations in your code where you have these indirect inputs and
or indirect outputs.
But what I see here is something that could be it could have some implications for our unit testing.
So back here in unit let we just run that again I'll hit run runs fine and works great.
Then down here for our non pure advanced I took that problematic use case.
I've updated and created a sample system that has some of those problems solved a bit, maybe not at
100% pure.
And I looked at different ways.
So I created one test to simulate or give an example of some different types of test doubles that are
being used.
First we have the standard one which is without any test doubles.
So that's just the kind of before picture.
Then we use a dummy here.
Then we use a stub here.
We use a spy here.
We use a mock here.
And finally we use a fake here.
I put them in an order here.
Same from the theory we saw before in that table of the different test doubles.
And it's ordered not in best to worst necessarily or something like that.
It's more from the least powerful test double that is kind of cheapest and easiest to implement to the
most powerful test double that could be the most time consuming to create.
Also does the most stuff, and you're going to find that in some cases, having one of those is better
than another.
Given your particular situation, you don't necessarily want to always use the fake or always use the
mock.
These are a bunch of different tools that you have in your tool belt and you can use them.
So let's step through them all, starting with the standard.
So here is the standard example.
This one does not yet have any test doubles added.
And it should look familiar because it's basically what we did for the original non pure example.
And that is we say convert value.
The result will be 40 when the input is four.
And here we set up the arrange.
We pass in the multiplier here.
Then we pass in the converter here.
And our one line here is passing in value.
But remember we're also multiplying value by multiplier.
So we've got a little bit of old info here.
Just to play with this a little bit.
If we remember the original pure implementation took all of the inputs here directly and that would
be more pure.
But for the purpose of our learning, I've created something that is less pure so that we can discuss
it so that one works great.
And that is kind of before we explore any test doubles.
So each of these we're going to go through, we're going to see kind of adding more and more powerful
test doubles.
Now, I admit, when coming up with this example that it makes the most sense kind of for the later
examples, the later test doubles mock and fake and spy and stuff.
The dummy ones are not as great, but I wanted to really use the same production code across all of
them.
So pardon me that the dummy and maybe the one after it are not the best example here, but I hope that
they're helpful for you learning them.
So here's the dummy.
What we're doing here is we're saying it returns negative one by default.
So if I pass in a null value two that's the dummy value here for the converter.
Now you can imagine maybe the class is going to break.
If we pass a null value.
That means the class is more hard in its dependency.
To that you would probably think, hey, it doesn't.
Every class you pass in need to be non null.
Yeah, probably in a lot of cases, yes.
But here I've given you an example and you can look at the source code.
The class will take in this null value.
Fine.
And there's lots of situations where putting in null or the very dumbest possible object will indeed
work.
Now probably if the converter was used in the method under test, this would throw a null ref.
But purposely here the.
What we're testing is that last result is going to have a particular value.
If I was testing the convert here, that one I know uses the converter.
So you have to think can I dummy my way through everything?
Probably not.
Probably that what you're passing in is going to be used somewhere for some shared state.
But we do indeed see that this passes with green check mark.
So we know it works.
And what we're doing is the important part for the dummy is that sometimes when when you're testing
something, it can be based on a cheap and easy dependency passed in.
So that's good.
Another thing that just to look at this, we could say without looking at the source code, we could
probably assume that if this works well, then it probably does not depend on what we're passing in
as null.
So it's a little hint that while the creation of this class requires something to be passed in, that's
something.
Since we're giving it null probably isn't used here.
Otherwise it would fail with a null ref.
Let's take a look at the source code.
So here's an example of the source code that's used for all the rest of the tests we're going to look
at here.
I pass in that converter and I store it.
I also set the last result to be negative one.
Negative one is often used as a this hasn't been set yet type value.
So that's why I chose it here.
But it could be zero.
It could be any value that you want.
And I just assume that when the object is created here, I set that as the kind of unset value.
Then down here, if I do call convert value, I properly update it.
So you can think of this as the initialized value.
And this is being updated here.
Now all I'm doing in the test is passing in null for the I converter.
And then I'm checking only the last result.
I'm not yet doing a test on this part here.
And we can see that last result because it doesn't depend on the converter at all.
It doesn't, for example, say, you know, return.
Converter dot something.
You know this line does not use it at all, that it's probably going to operate well, even if the converter
is null.
So as you're exploring your classes, you can just try this out and see what happens if I pass a null
in for one of my dependencies.
Does it just not compile?
Or does it throw a null ref value, or have some other kind of operation error that shows you that you
have a stronger dependency to what you're passing in?
And that might be fine, but it's something to play with here as you're learning about the differences
with your dependencies.
So back here in the test we see it would pass.
And it works negative one.
So that's an example of a dummy.
And as I admitted earlier it's not the best example in these first couple ones I really wanted to focus
on the later examples.
Here's the second one.
As we see in the comment, the test double we're doing here is a stub, and a stub is a test double
that is configured to return a specific value.
So this example here is imperfect.
I will admit that I'm passing in a null, which feels a little bit more like a dummy than before.
But because the dummy value passed in does indeed affect the test.
Because I'm calling convert value here.
I would consider it to be a stub.
You could also have something like a new, you know, temp converter.
And maybe that passes in the value.
You could imagine there's different ways you could sub in something kind of temporary there.
But for me, in this particular example, passing in a null that is indeed part of the call to testing
structure.
Means it's a sub.
So this will throw an error.
Now why does it throw an error?
Let's take a look at the source code again.
Because if I pass in null for converter and I store converter as null.
Then down here when I call something on null, it's going to freak out and throw a null ref or some
other type of exception.
And here I'm checking to make sure that it does indeed throw.
I don't love this particular example, but I hope it's helpful for learning.
Next let's look at the SPI concept.
So the definition here is a SPI test.
Double is a test double that confirms that a method was called.
We're not concerned with what is returned from the method.
We just want to know that it was called.
So we're going from less information less powerful in the dummy example and the sub example.
Here's a little bit more powerful kind of medium strength.
We know that something was called.
So here's how it works.
We use the n substitute library and we create a substitution for the interface.
Now remember when I was going through the examples here of talking about how to update and refactor
your production code to make it more testable?
One of the things that I did was use an interface in the refactor.
Interfaces are very useful in your code in general to give you a flexible, less hard coded coupling.
So it's good in production, but also specifically for this library here that does the mocking.
And creates the spy for us.
It will create on the fly in this one line a new implementation for converter based on AI converter.
So we don't have to go and create our own dummy class.
We don't have to create our own example class.
This does it for us here.
And we pass that in.
Then we when we pass in null.
Before we weren't able to call convert value, but here we can we can call it.
We're not concerned with what is returned here.
Sometimes you might be the needs of your test and we'll see.
In the next example you are concerned with what the return value is.
But here we just want to know was something called.
So we're making a unit test that assumes some structure inside the the system under test.
So we call that.
And then here's the assertion.
And notice the language here is part of the end substitute library.
We're saying that the converter.
We'll have received one call.
Not the value one, but one call to the convert value.
Which makes sense.
If I did this here.
I could assume that it has been called twice.
Or inside.
Perhaps I have converted value and I would assume one.
And then maybe I know because I authored this system that it actually calls something called internal.
Or prep.
System.
I could put all the different sub methods that I know probably happen when I call system convert value.
Now this is a pretty lean system, so the only assumption I know to do is this one here.
And let's see why we can assume that.
Well, if we look at the source code.
Whenever I call system convert value.
So here we can see that the convert value does indeed call converter dot convert value.
And it calls it exactly.
Once again, if I had had more than one call, I would have had to assert that convert value was called
twice each time I test the system.
But we only test once.
Now you can imagine you might have many, many, many more lines of code here, calling several different
areas of their dependencies.
And you can go back here in the test and you could test them all by adding more here.
So when I first learned about the SPI, I thought, well, isn't this too weak of a test?
Wouldn't I want to know not just that that it was called, but something specific was returned from
the call.
And you can do that in the next example, but this is a good way.
Again, we're looking from the least powerful symbols to most powerful test symbols.
Okay.
As I just hinted at, the next one here is mocking.
And mocking is not just if a method was called, but what does it return?
So this is the example we saw on the theory here.
What I've done in this one is I use the n substitute library to create on the fly a substitute test
double for I converter, just like last time.
But here I'm on the fly adding some of the implementation details.
I'm saying that converter dot convert value should be able to take in any int, and be able to return
the value times the multiplier in the theory section in the slides we saw this exact example.
And then down here I know because value times multiplier.
If value is three and multiplier is ten would equal 30.
So you can see that what this is really testing is this here.
But I am making an assumption which is what's under test that if I call system convert value that what
it returns is the same as converter dot convert value.
Now, there's a lot of words here and a lot of kind of confusing reused terminology.
So it is important to dig in and look at the example here.
But let's see if I'd actually had a plus one here.
Our test would fail because my test assumes that the systems convert value is exactly the same as the
converter convert value.
But if I had something here, this would be considered something of a indirect input.
So we're confirming that there's no indirect input.
And the test again passes.
So that is the mock.
And a mock is the test double that is configured to return specific values.
Now you can look at the substitute documentation which I've included in the links portion of the course.
You'd be able to do other things here.
Perhaps you want to say something like, I'll just mock it up that if you pass in the value of ten,
it would return this.
But if you pass, if you took in the word 15, it might do, you know, times a thousand or whatever.
There might be different circumstances where the arguments passed in change how the the output happens.
But this language here arguments any int is specific to the end substitute library.
And it says okay, no matter what we pass into the convert value here's going to be the value coming
out.
And finally our last one our most powerful type of test double is the fake.
So how does the fake work.
Well I'm not using any substitute here.
In fact, I'm not using it at all in this test.
What I do instead, and to be honest, before I learned a lot about test doubles, this was really a
common tool for me.
I didn't know it was called fake.
Years ago when I started my unit testing journey, I would just think, oh, I can't use the production
class for some reason.
So instead I'll create a lot of temporary testing only versions of certain dependencies.
So in the world of test doubles, those are called fake classes.
So how do I create that?
Well, in a different class you create your own implementation of fake converter or the way I choose
to organize it.
My art will approach that right above the test itself.
I create the fake implementation of whatever is needed.
So here I create a brand new class that is used only in the case of the testing.
I don't want to accidentally use this in production, so I give it a title like fake or test or sample
or example converter, something like that.
But following the language here, fake converter and I implement just enough of its functionality for
the test.
Now I see some unit test developers would create this fake converter and use it in many tests in the
same class.
There's no problem with that.
You don't necessarily have to create one for every single test individually.
But the nice thing here is that I know I need to implement just enough to make my test pass.
So it gives me a very simple goal to go after.
So here what I'm playing with is that I know that the last result is going to be the value times ten,
which I'm just making up my own implementation for the fun of it.
So if I pass in a value of four, I would expect the result to be 40.
If I wanted to play around with this and say 15 here, then I could update this to 45 because 15 times,
oh, I'm sorry, I could update it to 60 because 15 times four would be 60.
But let's go back to our original example.
There we go.
So something of note here is that when I pass in the fake converter, our production class doesn't necessarily
know fake converter versus a mock created by the substitute library versus a dummy.
The production code does not know and does not need to know.
It only needs an I converter.
And that gives us the flexibility to be able to implement classes and use the substitution library to
meet our testing needs.
If we didn't use an interface in our production code, we would be severely limited.
So let me reflect a little bit on what we've covered here.
We saw a pure system that has a pure function, and we saw the benefits there for testability.
Then we saw we just played with the idea of an impure version of that system.
And what are some of the problems with perhaps indirect input and indirect output that can come?
And then here in the advanced version, we've played with all the different ways we could work around
or massage the challenges introduced by having impure systems.
We've moved through dummy stub all the way up to fake.
Seeing that we can have light implementations of a test double up to hear the fake version is a complete
fake class that we're using for test only needs the beauty here by using the interface is that our production
class doesn't need to know is it in test mode, or which version of a test double is being passed in
the production code just works elegantly decoupled from the complexity of which type of I converter
is.
Gives us lots of different examples to play with.
So overall, I hope you've enjoyed learning about pure functions and test doubles and seeing the code
here that we've got in production, as well as in our tests that massage and let us learn for all the
different ways we can help get our tests to be more pure and help get our production code to be more
reusable with less side effects and less of those shared state issues that can pop up.
Thanks.